                                                                      *esoteric*

No, Emacs is not a text editor, strictly speaking. Neither, for that matter, is
Vim.

I personally refer to both of those programs as ontological filters. You could
also refer to each of them as a virtual prosthesis. What this means, is that
they are programs which determine the manner in which you perceive and navigate
through information. This is true because of the fact that Vim and Emacs
themselves, are not the only programs which exhibit their behaviour; you can
also get keybindings which mimic either of them for Bash, as well as being able
to run things like email programs and HTML editors as Emacs modes.

I discovered this when I realised that hermetic magick has a parallel, with the
Tarot and Astrology. Both of these are ostensibly divinatory systems, but they
are also plugged into a system of correspondences which describe various other
things, such as the characteristics of herbs to be used for medicines etc. If
you look at old evocational texts like the Goetia, then you will find that each
demon listed has both a Tarot card and an astrological correspondence as well,
to assist the operator in determining whether or not a given demon is the
appropriate one to call.

I would liken Vim with the Tarot, in the sense that superficially at least, it
is the simpler of the two. Emacs is more comparable with astrology, in the
sense that astrology connects directly with the entire system of
correspondences. The cards do as well, but not as specifically.

As a result of this, your choice between these two programs should be made with
great care; because each of said programs is essentially a window to the rest
of the operating system, and to a greater or lesser degree, your entire virtual
environment. Vim's and Emacs' keybindings become similar to another limb, when
they are sufficiently ingrained in muscle memory; you can fly through
information far more rapidly than you can if you are only using the arrow,
page, and home/end keys.

(from https://www.reddit.com/r/linux/comments/2he8ca/emacs_are_you_sure_its_a_text_editor/ckrxkvh)
